# Spotify Playlist Generator

The Spotify Playlist Generator creates a playlist in a user's Spotify library from a file of the form

```text
Artist, Song
```

A playlist can be generated by either running a Python script, or by running the provided Flask application.

This project also contains an authorization app for generating an initial access and refresh token. This app was pulled from the `authorization_code` directory within 
[spotify/web-api-auth-examples](https://github.com/spotify/web-api-auth-examples). The License for that project is included in the `auth_page` repo.

## Source Code
Link: https://github.com/AGnias47/SpotifyAPI

## System Requirements

* python >= 3.7
* pip
* node
* npm

## Playlist Format

The playlist should be in a text file of the form

```text
Artist, Song
```

If using a spreadsheet tool, such as Excel, add the artist to Column A and the song to Column B. Do not add column
 titles (ex. Row 1 should be the first song in your playlist). Ensure the file is saved as a CSV (i.e. not xlsx).
 
The playlist uses fuzzy matching to determine which songs should be added. This makes the playlist generator forgiving
 of misspellings, missing commas, and incomplete titles of songs, among other things, but it does increase the likelihood
 of an unwanted song being added to your playlist. So it goes. The playlist generator currently uses a [Levenshtein
 distance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Levenshtein_distance) ratio of 0.75. This can be altered if too many / not
 enough songs from a playlist are being added.

## Playlist Generation via Python Script

### Initial Token Generation

Use of the playlist generator requires users to obtain their own `client_id` and `client_secret` token from the
 [Spotify Developer's Dashboard](https://developer.spotify.com/dashboard/applications). Once these tokens are obtained,
 follow the steps below to obtain your initial `access_token` and a `refresh_token`.

1. In the project root directory, create a `keys.json` file with the following contents 
(Note: The `access_token` and `refresh_token` are intentionally left blank for now, but 
should conform to valid JSON standards):

    ```json
    {
        "client_id": "<Your Client ID>",
        "client_secret": "<Your Client Secret ID>",
        "access_token": "",
        "refresh_token": ""
    }
    ```

2. In the `auth_page` directory, run `npm install` to download the dependencies needed to run the auth page
3. In the project root directory, run `node ./auth_page/app.js`
4. Go to `localhost:8888` in a web browser and click "Log in with Spotify"
5. Authorize the app for access by logging in with your Spotify user credentials
6. Copy the `access_token` and `refresh_token` and use those values for the corresponding keys in the `keys.json` file

### Refreshing the Access Token

At this point, an access token has been generated, and the playlist generator is able to authenticate with Spotify.
 However, the access token expires after 1 hour. The access token can be regenerated using your refresh token via
 the following steps.
 
1. Ensure your `keys.json` file exists with all required fields. `client_id`, `client_secret`, and `refresh_token` must
 be accurate. If they are not, rerun the steps for "Initial Token Generation".
2. Run `./spotify_token_refresh/refresh.py`. The `access_token` in `keys.json` will be updated in place and should now
 be able to authenticate with Spotify.
 
The GUI method can always be used to generate a new access token, but this method allows for it to be updated directly
 from the command line.
 
### Running the Playlist Generator

Once the access token has been updated in `keys.json`, the playlist generator can be executed with the following command:

```bash
PYTHONPATH=. ./spotifytools/playlist_generator.py -f <Path to csv playlist> -n <Playlist name> -d <Playlist description (Optional)>
```

The script will print to stdout which songs were and were not added to the playlist.

## Playlist Generation via Flask App

The Flask application is in its initial development phase. While functional, it is error prone and needs a UI/UX update.

Use of the Flask app requires users to obtain their own `client_id` and `client_secret` token from the
 [Spotify Developer's Dashboard](https://developer.spotify.com/dashboard/applications). Once these have 
been obtained, create a `keys.json` file in the root directory with the following contents:

    ```json
    {
        "client_id": "<Your Client ID>",
        "client_secret": "<Your Client Secret ID>"
    }
    ```

### Running the Flask App

In the project root directory, run

```commandline
flask run
```

Navigate to `localhost:5000` and log in when prompted. Enter your desired playlist name, description, and the 
playlist content. Tracks should be separated by a line break. The dash (-) delimiter is used by default to separate
artists and song titles, but a comma or slash can also be used. Click submit, and the playlist should be created.

## Planned Improvements

* Flask App UI Upgrade
* User testing with more diverse array of songs
* Allow for usage of already created playlists

## Resources

The following resources were referenced significantly in the development of this project:

* [Spotify Developer Documentation](https://developer.spotify.com/documentation/web-api/)
* [spotify/web-api-auth-examples](https://github.com/spotify/web-api-auth-examples)  
* [vanortg/Flask-Spotify-Auth](https://github.com/vanortg/Flask-Spotify-Auth)
